---
title: "The change is in you"
date: "2016-12-27"
draft: false
hide: true
frontImageSrc: https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/2600/1*rc1DGx9OQ1ZCmQXJ6shVLw.jpeg
---

I’ve been working for years at different companies with legacy
products. And I felt terribly frustrated because of that. Especially when I heard about
developers in the wild doing really cool things, working on greenfield projects
or with the latest framework or library everyone’s talking about. At some point,
I realiazed how slow we were adding value to our products, how difficult it was
for us to release what it was supposed to be a simple change. And when my
product manager asked me why our competitors were releasing new features faster
than us, I couldn’t give a good answer.

<!-- more -->

After a while, I came to the conclusion that we were talking different
languages. While I was trying to make product people understand the technical
problems of our platform, they not only didn’t understand what I was talking
about but also neither was I.

In the beginning, I felt frustrated because I tried a bunch of different things
to change my situation and none of them did even a scratch in the system. Also,
I made some mistakes that I’m not proud of. But luckily, I had some help to
switch my attitude and face the situation from a different perspective.

If you ever felt the same or similar way, welcome to the club. I wanted to write
this to share my experience and inspire developers to overcome their
frustrations and become a change agent. I know it’s difficult, and it requires a
set of skills nobody is going to teach you. Skills totally unrelated with your
technical experience. But hey, I didn’t say it was supposed to be easy.
Otherwise, anyone could do it.

Before we start, please remember one simple rule. You should follow this rule
during the whole process and everything is going to be fine. Say with me:

> "I won’t give up."

#### Don’t fly solo

Does anyone share your point of view? Talk to your teammates, managers, even
people out of your company and make sure that you’re not the only one with your
point of view. If that’s the case, I’m not saying you don’t have a problem, but
you might have two problems. Because no matter what kind of change you’re trying
to make. I’m pretty sure about two things:

1.  **You can’t do it alone**. Otherwise, you would’ve probably done it already.
1.  **No one is going to do it for you**. Otherwise, you shouldn’t be worried about
    it.

#### Identify the root causes, skip the symptoms

What it’s probably happening is that you’re experiencing situations that are
making you and your teammates work in a difficult environment. You spend a lot
of time talking about those situations but when you try to fix them, you only
cut the corners. After a while, you realize that the situation is happening
again. Ask yourselves:

> "Are we trying to solve the right problems or just the symptoms?"

There is a bunch of things you can do before start coding to refactor/rewrite
something that you’re not comfortable working with. And the first one is to
**shape your problem, scope it and identify the root causes**. Make sure that
you aim to change the right thing.

You should read about [Root Cause Analysis
tools](https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newTMC_80.htm) and follow a
scientific approach to clearly identify what are the root causes of your
problems. Read about these tools and practice them, organize sessions with other
developers, involve different roles and validate that you’ve got a good
diagnosis.

#### Collect data

Now that you’ve got an idea of the shape of the problem and you’ve involved more
people in your quest to fix it, It’s extremely important to give a step back and
**consider any of your assumptions just as a hypothesis**. You might not be the
only one perceiving an issue as a problem, but you need to gather data in order
to decide how this problem is affecting your company. This data will validate
your assumptions and will also be useful to convince the management people to
invest in finding a solution.

For example, imagine that you come up to the conclusion that you spend a lot of
time fixing production bugs. Ask yourself some questions about your assumptions:

- **How much is “a lot of time”?** Do the exercise to measure not only the time
  you invest but the rest of the team. Time is easy to translate into money. And
  that’s a very strong argument.
- **How does that time impact your delivery?** A single measure may not give you
  enough information by itself, but if you contrast it versus other measurements,
  you could say something like “We spend 30% of our time to fix production bugs.
- **How many of your users are affected?** You could collect the number of tickets
  opened per issue, for example.
- **How long does it take to close a bug in average?**
- **What’s the distribution and affectation of the bugs in your platform?** This
  measure would give you a lot of information. Maybe most of the bugs concentrate
  in one of the modules of your platform and the problem would become more scoped.
  It might be something related with only a concrete area of the technology stack
  (only the front end, or the database)

In summary, **data is a powerful ally to convince non-technical people about the
problems they don’t know how to identify**.

And remember: as engineers, our responsibility is to analyze and raise these
problems in a way that our business people can understand them. And whilst
someone could question you about the need of solving a problem based on your
opinion, **there’s no argument against rough data**.

#### Think of a possible solution

No one likes people who only complain about the problems, no matter how much
effort do you invest in analyzing them. What people want to hear is a solution.
Now it’s time to find it.

But hold yourselves!

Think of a solution, but don’t rush to implement it yet. It might happen that
the best solution you can figure out is not doable. Then, you’ve got to ask for
that resources you need. And by resources, I mean time, people, knowledge…
Again, ask yourselves:

- Do you need a consultant or an expert to help you?
- Do you need specialists to implement a specific part of the solution?
- Do you need a certain amount of time to execute your plan?

This is the kind of questions that your manager is going to ask you when you
mention her what you want to do.

#### Prepare a speech for the management team

Now it’s time to convince your boss. This is the most important moment in your
process to become a change agent, since depending on how well prepared are you
to answer the manager’s questions, you’ll be successful introducing the change
in your company.

It’s a good idea to prepare a speech/presentation with the results of your
previous analysis. Think about a presentation no longer than 10–15 minutes, no
one wants to lose their time. Prepare some visual slides, to include:

- **A high-level presentation of the problem. **Describe the problem and use
  collected data to explain how it does impact your business. Forget about
  technical terms, use words they can understand. This means speaking in business
  language: _money, KPIs, metrics, waste_…
- **A presentation of your proposal to solve the problem. **Remember to forget
  about the technical details and focus on explaining the benefits for the
  business. Think about possible competitive advantages, business opportunities
  and explain how the data presented would change if you succeed implementing your
  proposed solution.

While you’re talking, your managers might agree with you on the problems and
also might trust you in the solution you’re presenting. But they most likely are
going to be thinking about one single thing:

> "How much do we need to invest on this?"

And here’s when we come to the most important step of your speech

#### Offer them something they can’t reject

What do you think is the purpose of your speech? I’ll tell you: **you are
selling something**. What you’re selling is your idea to work in something you
can’t do at your spare time or on your own. You’re selling the idea that the
best investment for your time at the company is working on that.

To be honest, we’re not talking about a simple change, but something disruptive.
That’s why you’re trying to convince your managers. But something disruptive
often is related with ideas like “_rewrite the whole application_”, “_stop
developing features_”, “_dedicate a whole team to do something with no business
value_” or “_hire people_”. You should anticipate to their fears and offer them
something they hardly can reject. This is what you should aim for:

- Ask them for a reasonably **short amount of time** to work on a proof of concept
  of your solution. A time window of two or three weeks should be something
  reasonably cheap to invest for a manager in something potentially good for their
  business. If you need help, try to limit the number of people working on your
  PoC just one or two people aside from you.
- Be transparent with everyone about what you’re trying to do with that time.
  You’ve got to manage the expectations and be realistic. Your proof of concept is
  not going to fix anything, its purpose is only demonstrates that the proposal is
  doable.

#### Be ready to fail

If you’ve been reading until this step, you perhaps realized that what we’re
trying to do is just **convincing people**. Starting with yourself.

That’s not an easy skill to learn and you might fail over and over again. But
you shouldn’t be discouraged. With every failure, iterate over the whole process
and find out what you could do better. Did you analyze the root causes of your
problem? Did you collect enough data to convince your managers? Did you propose
a good solution? Be ready to fail fast without burning yourself during the
process, because the worst thing you could do is to make it personal. Remember
what we said in the beginning:

> "I won’t give up."

I spent more than one year doing this process at my previous company before I
found the right arguments to convince my managers. Be persistent and trust
yourselves.

#### Develop your proof of concept

Once you’ve bought enough time to develop a proof of concept of your solution.
You’ve got a limited amount of time, so be really focused and work in something
really visual. Your mission is not only to demonstrate that your solution could
work but also to **impress** everyone. That’s why you should consider preparing
something unexpected, a trump card that nobody considered before. Something that
enlightens the true potential of what you’re trying to do.

Keep in mind that you’re doing just a proof of concept, so write code that you
can throw away and dedicate as much time as you can to prepare the fireworks.

#### Design an agile but realistic implementation plan

You’ve convinced everyone about your technical problems, they’re aware of the
impact of not doing anything in their business and you showed them how to fix
it. Everyone is on the same ship as you, and they’re keen to row in the same
direction.

Now it’s time to be serious. You’ve got to **manage the expectations** and be
realistic. After your proof of concept, the first question would probably be:

> “When is this going to be done?”

Be careful before answering! You know, and so do I, that the change you’re
trying to promote may take you _months_. There’s a huge risk on waiting months
before having a return on that investment. Also, you don’t want to be developing
something for months before releasing it into production, because that situation
is extremely stressful.

You should try to draw an implementation plan following Lean/Agile principles
and deliver something as soon as possible with small and iterative increments of
value.

For example, imagine that you’ve got to rewrite the front end code of a website
and apply a new framework that just came up. Just writing the whole code may
take you months, right? Instead of rewriting everything, you should **think
about the smallest possible change you could do to deliver something in
production as soon as possible**. Ask yourselves:

> "What could I do in just a week?"

Maybe the solution is just to rewrite one of the pages, the simplest one. Or
just one module of a single page. If you start with the smallest thing as
possible, you’ll realize of everything you need to do to apply your change.
Because maybe you don’t only need to change your front end framework, but you
have to redo your tracking module, think of a new solution for bundling,
internationalization, SEO or build an API to support everything…

Coming back to the question, when someone asks you about **when is it going to
be done**, a good answer could be:

> “We’ll start implementing this module and from that point, we’ll gradually
> increment the feature coverage in small iterations”

Small. Iterative. Incremental. Just repeat the mantras of agile software
development and trust yourselves.

This is a good answer because the expectations and the risk of the project are
on hold. Of course, your managers would like to know when is it going to be done
and how much do they have to invest on that, but you’ll be able to give a better
answer after working for some time in the project. Offer them to check the
progress every two weeks and you’ll feel relieved of the pressure of a huge
project. They’ll also feel more comfortable keeping the risk on hold during the
whole project.

#### Conclusion

If you’ve got a technical problem, you are the engineer. Don’t expect anyone to
come and fix it for you, or ask you to dedicate as time as you need to fix it.
Your responsibility is to evaluate that problem, collect data to convince the
ones that make decisions and figure out a possible solution. Then, you should
present it in a way everyone can understand you and draw an implementation plan
that doesn’t make your company stop delivering value during months. Instead of
that, think of an implementation plan to allow you release small increments in
production to validate your assumptions.

This article was an intent to inspire and encourage software engineers to
promote technical changes in their organizations, following an approach to first
involving and convincing as many people as possible, and then implement the
change with success, minifying the risk.

And remember: If you don’t succeed, iterate and don’t make it personal. Don’t
give up. You’re right. Just keep trying.
